[[manage-account]]
== Profiles and Account Management

In Github there are two types of accounts: individual and
organization.  Most GitHub users will only ever have an individual
account this is the account you created when you signed up for GitHub,
selected a username and a password, and it is associated with a
profile which is your identity in GitHub.  This chapter covers the
management of this profile and the various options that are available
for individual accounts.

=== Viewing a User Profile

Viewing anyone's profile is easy, just append a user's username to the
GitHub URL.  For example, to laod the profile page for Linux Torvalds
go to http://www.github.com/torvalds.  The creator of the Linux Kernel
will be staring back at you alongside his popular repositories,
location, most used languages, organization, number of followers, and developer
contribution activity.  You can learn quite a bit about a developer
from a GitHub profile, and the public profile has been designed to
feature a user's open source contributions.

image::images/user-profile.png[]

The amount of information displayed on a user profile changes depending
on the relationship you have with another user and depending on what
he or she is sharing with you.  For example, if you load your own
GitHub profile, you'll see everything including private repositories
and a list of contributions that spans both public and private
repositories.  The information displayed on a user's profile changes
depending on the level of access a user has to information about a
user.  For example, if you are a member of an Organization's team
which grants access to a collection of private repositories, you will
be able to view another user's contributions to this library on the
GitHub user profile page.

==== Follow Statistics and Stars

This area advertises how many developers someone is following as well as
how many are following them.  It also lists the repositories a
particular user has starred.

Followers::

    Clicking on followers will show you a list of the users who have
    decided to follow this user.

Starred::

   Click on "starred" will display a list of repositories this use r
   has "starred".  What is the significance of a star? The definition
   is really up to you.  Some users may think they are providing a personal
   endorsement to a particular repository while others may hand out
   stars for anything they are interested in.  Think of staring as a
   repository as you would a Facebook "like" or a Google+ "+1".

Following::

   Click on following will show you which users this user is
   interested in enough to follow.

[NOTE] 
Now statistics like "How many followers" does so-and-so have
and "How many are they following" always remind me of middle school,
but there is some value to the metric.  Just look at systems like
Stack Overflow which have succeeded at turning expertise into a
measurable statistic. Clearly you can get carried away in a world that
is constantly focused on how many Facebook, Twitter, GitHub followers
you have, but when you are looking at someone's collected body of work
on GitHub it helps to also understand that they have attracted a large following.


==== Tracking Platform

This is the social aspect of Github that makes this platform very
diferent from every other open source community that has came before
it.   The ability to keep track of interesting developers and find out
what they are working on gives you the ability to follow particularly
innovative people and find particularly innovative projects.

image::images/user-public-activity.png[]

For example, you can keep track of Linus Torvald's activity on the
Linux Kernel while, at the same time, keeping track of the what the
core Rails team is paying attention to.   Not only can you track how
many followers a particular user or project has amassed, you can also
drill into the list of followers.  On GitHub there is no ability to
follow a user privately. When you follow or star a project, you do so
publicly.

This ability to measure different kinds of activity and interest in
repositories means that you can start to learn from the wisdom of
GitHub's crowd. In an industry that can change on a dime this ability
to see what the crowd is watching helps you identify trending
languages and libraries in a way that is empircal.  You don't have to
rely on seeing an article published by a company in an
advertising-driven web site to understand that there is a huge number
of projects and people paying attention to Twitter Bootstrap.  No, the
number of forks and the fact that it is the most forked project on
GitHub are all the proof you need that something about that project is
worth paying attention ti.

.Leaking Information, GitHub-style
[NOTE]
A word of caution: If you use GitHub for a combination of both open
source and proprietary development, you should take time every few
weeks to make sure that your public profile isn't leaking proprietary
information or information that was never mean to be shared. Shortly
after GitHub released its powerful Search API in 2013, there was a
controversy when people started searching for private SSH keys (files
which are never meant to be shared with anyone). Many users were
versioning a home directory and inadvertantly sharing very private
information in a public repository. When using a platform that
straddles both the private and the public, you'll want to make sure
that you take some time to view your own profiles and repositories as
an unauthenticated, anonymous user.


=== Editing Your User Profile

To edit your profile, click on your username in the upper right-hand
corner of the GitHub interface.  This will show you your own profile,
at this point click on the "Edit Your Profile" button and you will see
a form resembling the one shown below.

image::images/user-edit-profile.png[]

The Public Profile form contains the following fields, many of which
are self-explanatory.

Name::
    Your name if you have one.  (An important thing to know is that
    you've agreed to supply your full name as a part of the GitHub
    terms of service.)

Email::
    GitHub allows you to specify any number of email addresses.  If
    you are a member of several organizations in GitHub, you will
    frequently have various email addresses associated with a single
    GitHub account.  This field on the Public Profile page is for the
    email address which will be listed as your one, public emails
    address.

URL::
    This is a URL that will be associated with your account. Often
    users will list a personal blog or a company website.

Company::
    If you choose to associate your GitHub account with a company, you
    can list it here.  Not that you may also be a member of one or
    more GitHub organization teams.  Your members on these teams
    doesn't have to line up with the Company listed on your profile.

Location::
    Should you choose to share it, you can supply a Location to
    GitHub.  Most people either list a country, a city, a state, or a
    combination thereof.

==== Creating a Profile Picture with Gravatar

Maybe you've updated the Gravatar Email and noticed that your profile
picture is already populated.  Maybe you haven't.  If you understand
what Gravatar is, you'll understand why your profile picture is
already populated.  If you don't know what Gravatar is, read on.

Your image on Github, it is from Gravatar.   Gravatar is a just that a
Globally Recognized Avatar.  An iconic picture which is associated
with your email address.  Gravatar (http://www.gravatar.com) is a
service from The Automattic Team - the team behind Wordpress, Akismet,
IntenseDebate, and a number of other popular services.

To upload a new avatar associated with your email address follow these
steps:

. Go to Gravatar in a browser at http://www.gravatar.com

. Type in your email in the text-field shown on Gravatar's site

. Click on "Get Your Gravatar" and follow the instructions

At this point, you will be able to upload one or more images to your
Gravatar account and assign a content rating to your newly uploaded
avatar.  This image will follow you around the web whenever you use
services that are integrated with Gravatar including GitHub,
WordPress, Hootsuite, and StackOverflow.  If you don't have one, go
get one. People want to know what you look like.

Gravatar Email::
    This field is available on your GitHub profile and it is the email
    address GitHub uses to retrieve your avatar from Gravatar.  Note
    that the contents of this field are not shared on your public
    profile.  If you want to list a public email on your GitHub
    profile that is different from your Gravatar email address, go
    right ahead.

==== Managing Your Organizational Associations

While you are editing your profile, take a look at the left-hand menu
and you will see a link for Organizations.  While the Profile option is
the first item in this menu, the Organizations item is the last option
in this menu. Click on this menu item and you will see a list of
organizations that list you as a member.

When you maintain an organization you have the power to add any GitHub
user to a team, and teams are used to group people and assign
privileges to specific repositories. Organization administrators have
the ability to associate you with any organization, but what if you
want to leave an organization?   That's where this interface comes
into play.  This organizations page exists for you to see a list of
the organizations that include you on a team and allow you to leave an
organization.

Maybe you are a consultant that works for many clients and your time
with a particular time has come to an end?  Maybe you are a consultant
trying to send a message to a client that has decided not to pay your
bill on time?  Maybe you are looking for a creative way to quit your
current job?  If you want to leave an organization, click the Leave
button and enjoy, and don't let the door hit you on the way out.

image::images/user-orgs.png[]

[NOTE]
Leaving an organization is a dramatic thing.  When you leave an
organization, GitHub is going to remove from all Organization teams
and you'll be unable to see any private activity within that
organization.  Don't play with this button and don't leave an
organization unless you know what you are doing. One wonders why this
button isn't in the Danger Zone?

==== Advertising Organization Membership

Your association with an organization is two-way street.  Just because
an organization has included you on a team, this doesn't mean that
your associate with this organization is going to appear on your
public profile. For this to happen, one of two things will have to
happen:

. One of the Owners of the Organization will need to publicize your
membership in the organization.

. You will need to publicize your membership in an organization.

To publicize your membership in an organization, go to the members
page of this organization.  For example, I'm a member of the Tomitribe
organization, to publicize my membership I would go to
https://github.com/tomitribe?tab=members and then click on Publicize
Membership.

image::images/user-publicize.png[]

Once I clicked on that button, an event would be added to my timeline,
and the Tomitribe membership would then be listed on my public
profile.  If I changed my mine and wanted to conceal my membership in
the Tomitribe organization I would return to the same page:
https://github.com/tomitribe?tab=members - and I would then click on
the Conceal Membership button.

.To Advertise or Not to Advertise Organization Membership
[NOTE]
Just because you are associated with an organization, it doesn't mean
that everyone needs to know about it. If you are working for an open
source company - a company that supports open source development via
commercial support - it makes perfect sense to advertise your
association with an organization.  If you are associated with an open
source foundation, it makes perfect sense to advertise that. On the
other hand, if you are a member of an organization that is doing work
for the CIA, you may not wish to advertise that association.  GitHub
built in the ability to publicize or conceal membership in
organizations because it respects the idea that everyone should be
able to exert some control of the public interface they provide to the world.

=== Changing Account Settings

In the previous section you learned how to change the information in
your profile, in this section you'll learn how to change your account
settings, your password, and your username.

To edit your account settings, click on the tool icon in the upper
right-hand of the GitHub interface.  This will load the Edit Profile
page.  In left-hand navigation menu, click on Account Settings.  Now
the Account Settings form is a bit of a dangerous place, here you can
change your password, your username, or, if you really want to, delete
your account.

image::images/user-account-settings.png[]

To change your password, you'll need to supply your current password
once and your new password twice for confirmation.  Once you've
supplied your new password twice, click on Update Password to change
your password.  This section of the form also provides a password
recovery link - if you need to recovery your password, click on the "I
forgot my password" link next to the Update Password button.

.Choose a Good Password
[NOTE]
GitHub isn't picky about passwords, and it is up to you to choose a
good password.  GitHub's minimum standards are seven characters with
at least one number. Don't let GitHub's reliance on SSH keys convince
you that it is security, if someone were to gain access to your GitHub
password they could exact some real damage. Choose a strong password.


==== Changing Your Username

Do you really want to do this?  No, really? You change your name on
GitHub and everyone who knows you as "razzmatazz" is going to have to
learn to call you "b1gdawg". Everyone who has grown used to seeing
your commits is going to have to learn to recognize under this new use
name.  Really, even if you think things are going to be better after
your magical username change, please understand that this is going to
change your interface to the public.  Think twice, this has some real
side-effects.



=== Email and Notifications

There are some interesting nuances in Github when it comes to email
addresses and notifications.    If you have to maintain multiple
email addresses, say for work and then for personal OSS contributions,
Github gives you the option to do this and then to route specific
emails to specific accounts.  This section outlines how...

==== Working with Multiple Email Addresses

image::images/user-email-addresses.png[]

==== What is a "Verified" email?

If you don't verify your email...

==== Custom Email Routing for Organizations

If you are like me you have several email addresses...

==== Managing Notifications

image::images/user-notifications.png[]

=== Account Security

==== Your SSH Keys

Maybe a brief discussion of what an SSH Key is for those who don't yet know.

image::images/user-ssh.png[]

===== How to create an SSH Key

Easy instructions, assume linux(-ish) instructions.

Provide a pointer for Windows users.

===== Do your SSH Keys have a Password? (ssh-agent)

Briefly discuss the pros and cons of passwordless SSH keys.

==== When should I use SSH vs HTTPS?

Always, do it.

===== Alternative: Official Github Client

Remember that if you have to support non-technical users, the official
Github client is a great option.

==== Security History

image::images/user-security-history.png[]

==== Applications

image::images/user-applications.png[]

===== What is OAuth?

image::images/user-applications-register.png[]

===== Authorized Applications

Be careful who you trust.

=== Your Repositories

==== Creating a New Repository

How to create a new repository.

==== How to Decide: Private vs Public

Github is a great way to unintentionally make a bunch of code public
by mistake.

==== Leaving a Repository

If you need to leave, here's the exit.

=== Deleting Your Account

Now why would you want to go and do a thing like that?   If you do,
refer to the User Account Settings (xref).

=== Github Billing Preferences

If you are going to have private repositories with private
contributors, Github is going to require a subscription plan.   To
open your billing preferences, click...

image::images/user-billing.png[]

==== Payment History and Invoices

If you need to obtain an invoice for your Github account (maybe
because you need to convince your boss to pay for a Github account?).
There is a helpful list of invoices.

image::images/user-billing-history.png[]

