[[manage-org]]
== Managing Your Organization Account

If you are using Github to for internal development, or if your open
source project grows larger enough to benefit from the structure
provided by an organization you'll need to know how to manage one.

=== Organization Accounts

Organization accounts are billing separately from individual accounts,
 and the following figure shows the various plans that are available.
 
image::images/org-billing.png[]

==== Selecting the Appropriate Account

The driving factors for organziation accounts are the number of
private repositories you'll need to track in an organization's
account.    Note that there is no fee per contributor, all of the
billing is based on private repositories which means that you can have
any number of contributors..

* Free
* Bronze
* Silver
* Gold
* Platinum
* Diamond
* Holmium
* Fermium
* Einsteinium
* Mendelevium

Credit card information.

==== Upgrading and Downgrading Your Account

Right, so what happens if I downgrade my Holmium account to a Diamond
account and I exceed the number of allowed repositories?

==== Viewing Invoices and Payment History

Click on Payment History to view a list of completed transactions, and
then click on an individual month to get an invoice.

image::images/org-payment-history.png[]

Note: This is an important section.   If you are anything like me, you
never asked your boss for permission to use Github.   You simply
signed up for an organization account at the Bronze level and you've
been expensing it for a few years.  Eventually someone is going to
catch on that we're using Github and want to transition this to a
company credit card, but, in the meantime, you'll need to find those
invoices once a month.

=== Managing The Profile

There's nothing surprising on this page, you can edit name, email,
location.

image::images/org-profile.png[]

==== Renaming an Organization (and Why You Should Avoid Doing So)

Just like renaming a user account or a repository, these actions often
have unintended side effects

==== How to Change Your Organization's Picture

When you updated your organization's profile, you supplied a publicly
visible email address - a Gravatar Email address.  If this address has
a Gravatar, it will be used as your organization's profile picture.

"What's a Gravatar?", you ask.   Gravatar: http://www.gravatar.com

==== This is the End.  Deleting and Organization

Maybe your startup is no more?  Maybe you decided to call it quits.
Whatever the reason, the organization profile screen has a danger zone
with a single option - "Delete Account".

=== Keeping Your Organization Secure

A company's source code is often one of its most closely guarded
secrets.    This section outlines the various controls Github users
have over the code that is stored on Github.

==== User and Permission Grouping

[User and Permission Grouping](http://vimeo.com/35539203)

==== Owners Manage Organizations

Only Owners have access to manage and organization, create new
organization repositories, and manage organiztion teams.    If you are
securing your organization's data you will want to make sure that you
only grant ownership status to a small set of internal administrators.

image::images/org-owners.png[]

==== Security History / Audit Log

A comprehensive security policy also involves tracking and auditing
the changes made to security.  To view the audit log for changes to
your organization's securty, click...

image::images/org-security-history.png[]

==== Manage Organization Teams

image::images/org-team-overview.png[]

===== Managing Permissions and Members

Explain.

image::images/org-team-detail.png[]

==== Strategies for Organization Security

There are a few approaches to organization security that depend on the
kind of organiztion your are running as well as the nature of the code
that is being produced.

===== Internal Corporate: Private Repositories, Private Contributors

This is a common pattern, a company hosts internal code on Github and
establishes one or more internal teams.

Example diagram of teams

===== Open Source: Public Repositories, Public Contributors

Very often an OSS foundation will create a Github account to manage a
set of open source projects.

Example diagram of teams

===== Mixed Public/Private Development

In this scenario you will need to be very deliberate about the Teams
you create and the permissions you grant to these teams.

Example diagram of teams

=== Organization Pull Requests


image::images/org-pull.png[]

=== Organization Issues

image::images/org-issues.png[]
