[[overview-dashboard]]
== The Github Repository Interface

Maybe the most important screen in Github is the interface for a
single repository.

Here is the view of a single repository.

image::images/repo-overview.png[]

==== Watching and Starring a Repository

Developers have a difficult task, they need to track several
technologies at once and, very often, they have to make a trade off
between being productive with the libraries and tools they depend on
and being aware of a constant stream of changes to these same
libraries and tools.  Watching and starring a repository let you...

image::images/repo-watching-starring-forking.png[]

Think of starring a repository as adding a repository to your public
list of repositories you are "liking".


=== Repository Manipulation: Who Needs a Client?

This is one of the most valuable features...

==== Creating New Files

See that document with a plus sign in it?   Click it.   Yes, you can
create files in Github.

==== Editing Files in the Github Interface

If Github thinks it can help you edit a file, it will show you an Edit
button on a file.

==== In-place Edits and Your Teams

Does your project include any documentation, how about a README.   You
can use in-place editing...


=== Repository Activity

==== Repository Commits

The most basic task an SCM tool can do is provide a view into how a
repository is changing over time.  The following sections outline the
various tools for exploring repository activity.

image::images/repo-commits.png[]

===== Commits Keyboard Shortcuts

Almost every important screen in Github has a set of keyboard
shortcuts.   If you are looking at the commit history of a repository,
these are the...

image::images/repo-commits-shortcuts.png[]

==== Repository Branches and Tags

Git is all about the branches.    

image::images/repo-branches.png[]
 
===== Switching to a Branch or a Tag

image::images/repo-branch-switch.png[]

==== Repository Downloads

image::images/repo-downloads.png[]

===== Download a Repository as a ZIP

In addition to providing a mechanism to upload files, you can also
download an entire repository as a ZIP.   This is a cheap mechanism
for exporting a repository without the .git directory.

=== Distributed Collaboration

==== Viewing a Repository's Network

When you have a public Github repository that other developers are
interested in they will fork it and customize your code.   You can see
a diagram of these repositories by clicking on...

image::images/repo-network-graph.png[]

This list of repositories is called a network, and you can see a list
of indivudla members here:

image::images/repo-network-members.png[]

===== Network Graph Keyboard Shortcuts

Network graphs can be very details and can strech back years.   To
navigate these graphs, here are a set of keyboard shortcuts.

image::images/repo-network-graph-shortcuts.png[]

==== Repository Pull Requests

Pull requests are "the reason for the season."

image::images/repo-pull-requests.png[]

===== Merging a Pull Request

image::images/repo-pull-request.png[]

===== How to Encourage Pull Requests

I almost wrote this title as "how to not discourage pull requests".
What you need to know about pull requests is that no one is forcing
you to accept a pull request.   If you disagree with a pull request,
do so politely and also understand that, this is git, whoever forked
your repository didn't have to ask permission to do so, and the pull
request was really just a courtesy.

=== Repository Issues

image::images/repo-issues.png[]

==== Creating a New Issue

image::images/repo-create-new-issue.png[]

==== Interacting with an Issue

image::images/repo-issue-interact.png[]

=== Repository Graphs

==== Contributors Graph

image::images/repo-graph-contributors.png[]

==== Commits Graph

image::images/repo-graph-commits.png[]

==== Code Frequency Graph

image::images/repo-graph-code-frequency.png[]

==== Punchcard Graph

image::images/repo-graph-punchcard.png[]
