---
layout: default
title: "Bhutan: Monsoons and Miracles"
published: false
---

Honolulu Advertiser Hob Osterlund
Our airplane is several miles from its destination in Paro, 
Bhutan. It’s late afternoon, and we’re flying so low we can 
almost count the individual blue pine trees in steep 
forests below. The airport’s altitude is 7000 feet, and 
we’re still in monsoon clouds. Soon we can see the branches 
on the trees, mingling tentatively with loose tufts of 
vapor, whispering the presence of a mystery. We spot women 
in small rice paddies, close enough for us to name multiple 
colors in the kiras, their traditional clothing. Sharp 
embankments are within shouting distance of our wings, and 
children on mountain roads stop to wave enthusiastically as 
we descend. We’ve been told that a safe arrival in the Paro 
airport takes a skilled aviator, so it’s a good time to 
remember that miracles are known to happen here. Though 
most people have still not heard of Bhutan, it is a world 
unlike any other. 
The Kingdom of Bhutan is nuzzled in the eastern Himalayas, 
north of India and south of Tibet. Not only is it in the 
mountains, it is virtually all mountain. The country ranges 
in elevation from about 600 feet to 24,778 feet, and only 
8% of the land is tillable. Flying is the only way for 
tourists to get there. Druk Air is the exclusive airline to 
fly into Bhutan, with a fleet of two 72-passenger 
airplanes. It has the distinction of being the only airline 
to routinely fly over eight of the tallest peaks in the 
world. 
The word Druk means dragon. Druk Yul is what Bhutanese call 
their country, translated as the Land of the Thunder 
Dragon. It is listed as one of the ten biodiversity hot 
spots in the world, with an estimated 165 mammal and 5500 
plant species, 500 of which are considered medicinal. There 
are about 770 bird species. In contrast, North America is 
reported to have about 800 species of birds, in a land mass 
more than 400 times larger than Bhutan. Seventy-two percent 
of the Kingdom is covered with forests. A remarkable 26% of 
the entire country is protected by national parks and 
sanctuaries. Most of the giant peaks have never been 
explored by westerners and are considered home to the 
deities, so climbing them is not allowed. Bhutan is so 
protective of its environment that killing a black-necked 
crane means life imprisonment. Plastic bags are illegal. 
The king of Bhutan, His Majesty Jigme Singye Wangchuck, is 
respected both internationally and at home. In his 26-year 
reign he’s been credited with opening Bhutan to the 
visitors for the first time. Bringing in tourists is one 
thing, but delivering Bhutan to the 21st century is quite 
another. Bhutan’s resources are as vulnerable as they are 
impressive. It has a population of about 650,000 people, 
most of whom are scattered in remote valleys narrowly 
wedged between high mountains. It measures 180 miles long 
and 100 miles wide, a land mass about one-fifth the size of 
Oregon. The majority of people live on subsistence farming 
with an average annual income of $510.00. Roads have been 
built within the last 20 years, and though they connect 
some regions, most of the country can only be reached by 
footpath. In order to be cautious with its capacity to 
absorb visitors, Bhutan’s annual tourist count is about 
7,000. 
We have come to trek and to experience the culture. We’re 
also drawn to the high mountain passes where prayer flags 
are planted in auspicious locations and where invocations 
are best heard by the gods and goddesses of the Himalayas. 
We each have our own list of requests for our challenged 
world, and are eager to set these prayers free. Once our 
plane lands, we touch the tarmac in gratitude and bow in 
reverence toward the mountains, which totally capture our 
attention. The mountain pass through which our airplane 
flew is already obscured. These are monsoon clouds, not the 
angry hit-and-run variety, but more of the what’s-the-
hurry, drooling kind. They hang low on the mountains like 
gauze petticoats, allowing a seductive look upwards. 
Gradually we notice another subtler, equally magnificent 
quality. It’s the sweet, unassuming silence. No traffic on 
the ground or in the air, no leaf blowers, and blessed be, 
no car stereos. In fact, the airport parking lot has 
exactly 12 cars. Listen to that quiet, we whisper to each 
other. There is literally nothing to hear except the wind 
and the birds. Considering ourselves aficionados of quiet, 
we are now officially in heaven. 
It’s easy to like the Bhutanese at once. For example, we 
are told by two immigration officials that our visa expired 
last week. We explain our itinerary. They smile and shrug, 
saying something we will hear many more times in Bhutan. 
What can you do? They extend our legal time with a proper 
stamp and without fee. Leaving the building, we are greeted 
by a local man wearing a Bhutanese man’s attire called a 
gho, which resembles a colorful knee-length bathrobe with 
rolled-up sleeves. He holds up a sign with our names, which 
is especially charming since we are the only tourists in 
the entire airport. His name is Wangdi, and he is to be our 
guide. He introduces us to our driver Sharub, which sounds 
just like Shut Up. This name turns out to be apropos, since 
Sharub knows no English and will never once speak to us. He 
is a good sport, and has a perpetual smile with perfect 
teeth. 
We’re shuttled to a hotel set among forest and flower 
paths, and given tiny keys on brass key holders so heavy 
they’d make your pants fall down. Tourist season officially 
began one week ago. So far we’re the only guests in the 
hotel. Our next several days are spent hiking, taking 
countless photographs, and visiting remarkable fort-
monasteries called dzongs. When we visit the Paro dzong, 
Wangdi proudly tells us this particular structure was 
featured in the movie Little Buddha. We also climb to an 
especially sacred monastery called the Tiger’s Nest, 
notched precariously into a sheer cliff wall. It’s Bhutan’s 
most famous landmark. 
Visiting a farmhouse, we sip yak butter tea with a widow 
who is old friends with Tshering, our gracious travel 
agent. The farmer woman’s son has just graduated from 
college in India and has returned to help her with the 
farm. For the benefit of their family and the world, they 
have hired a dozen monks and nuns who are chanting and 
fasting in an adjacent room. We are invited to duck through 
a curtain to join them, and the chanters welcome us by 
squeezing closer together on the floor to give us space. We 
are told that all Bhutanese people have a specific place in 
their homes for worship. As Buddhists, they pray for all 
sentient beings. Little do we realize how especially timely 
this is. 
The evening prior to our trek two other Americans approach 
us with troubled faces. They’ve just called home. The date 
is September 11th and it’s 9:15 am in New York. Since we 
have no further access to news, we learn very little more 
until the next morning when we are leaving on our trek and 
are joined by a dozen schoolchildren. We are able to infer 
the ominous developments from them when we ask them why 
they’re out of school. Because two big buildings in America 
fell down, madam. As it turns out, the king has closed the 
country so his people can light butter lamps for us, in 
mourning. We carry the news of America and the king’s 
compassion like backpacks into the mountains. When we reach 
the high altitude passes, our supplications are even more 
fervent than we imagined when we left home. May the 
miracles that have protected Bhutan fly from these 
mountains to protect the entire world. May we create a 
world safe for all children to wave greetings to airplanes. 
May the illusion of separation be lifted so we can remember 
our compassion for each other. May those who govern do so 
wisely. May we keep places of mystery, peace and quiet safe 
for the whole world to visit. 
To learn more about Bhutan, visit http://www.lhayul.com To plan a trip to Bhutan, email Tshering Pem at 
lhayul@druknet.net.bt. To learn more about nature in 
Bhutan, email the Royal Society for the Preservation of 
Nature at rspn@druknet.net.bt.   
 Any help: Contact me in Hawaii at: hob@hawaii.rr.com 
 
  
 September 2001
